---
layout: post

title: Heroin in Chicago 
description: What causes declining arrests?

author: Shanshan
email: shanshan2016@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: shanshanw26
---

## Statistics from Chicago data portal

<iframe width="898.5" height="433.5" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1538B4R9Y87ScfxQcSsZ0aoRk5Un4Gf9LCzgO9oBdJcM/pubchart?oid=1022308284&amp;format=image"></iframe>

According to the City of Chicago Data Portal, despite a couple of fluctuations, there is a general downward trend in the number of heroin related arrests in Chicago over the past decade (2005 ~ 2015). The highest arrest, which is over 8,000, comes in 2005. And the lowest arrests appears in 2015, less than 5,000 with a 2.7% decrease from the previous year. 

Take Austin for example. In Austin, a community in the west side Chicago where the open heroin market has been flourishing for years, the number is also going down. In 2003 and 2004, there were nearly 2,000 arrests each year, while since 2011 the number no longer surpassed 1,500. In 2015, it dropped to a new low of 830.

<iframe width="774" height="371" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1538B4R9Y87ScfxQcSsZ0aoRk5Un4Gf9LCzgO9oBdJcM/pubchart?oid=2099594162&amp;format=image"></iframe>

Heroin has long been a serious problem in Chicago. The I-290 Eisenhower Expressway, known as the "heroin highway", is the gateway to the west side drug market. 

The number may not speak for the whole heroin epidemic. Statistics in the news are still alarming. As reported by Austin Weekly News in Oct 2015, more than 70 people across Chicago were treated for heroin overdoses within a span of three days last week, according to the Chicago Fire Department.

In terms of the overall drug busts, according to the story published on Chicago Sun-Times in May 2016, the rate of drug arrests dropped more sharply in the first four months of 2016. Continuing with this pace, the police will make the smallest number of arrests since 1973. The article also discussed the reasons for the decline. 

The article pointed out that according to the city payroll records, there are 1,200 fewer officers on the Chicago Police force than five years ago. Police have been less aggressive on the street since the release of the Laquan McDonald video in November, 2015. As we can see from the related statistics, in 2015, communities such as Austin, HumboldtPark, NorthLawndale, which has more arrests than others, all saw an obvious decrease.  

Population may be another important factor. Chicago has faced lower population levels, with a 6.3 percent decrease since the year 2000. In Austin, one of the largest communities in the city, has lost approximately 19,000 residents during the same time period. It is possible that the declining population lead to fewer people selling and buying the drugs, according to Lirigio. In addition, the violent crimes have been concentrated in the African American communities and an estimated 200,000 African-Americans have left the city since 2000.





